I haven’t written anything in this blog for quite some time. Been going through the motions of learning and consolidating my skillset as a software engineer. There is a balance between honing your skills, approach, depth/breadth of knowledge and producing high quality work. This balance is the crux of this post.

I heard the titular quote at an offsite in New York and it really resonated with me. It’s a metaphor describing how part of our time is spent pumping out features whereas the rest is spent skill-building. Both are productive and necessary aspects of working as a software engineer.

Something I struggle with is that learning often ‘feels’ unproductive. Pouring over documentation, building mini POCs and sometimes even asking questions can seem like it’s not contributing to the work at hand. This maybe true in the short-term, we aren’t contributing to the code base of a product if we’re learning how to commit code of a high quality. However, being productive at work doesn’t necessarily mean you have to commit code. If we can learn a new skill or library and communicate this to the rest of the team then we’re actually saving time i.e. being productive. Even if the output of the learning is that we end up at a dead end, i.e. s library is not fit for our purpose; this is a productive use of time and worth communicating to the team!

Transferring knowledge and skills raises the bar of expertise for the team. It contributes to the overall productivity, output and growth.

Communicating information is not easy though. There’s a reason why there’s an endless sea of books on communication because there are so many ways it can go wrong. I’ll probably write more on this in a later post but the goal is to drip-feed bite-sized chunks of information over time. Too much in one giant wall of text means some parts will be missed. Too little and details will be lost. The ‘Goldilocks’ amount is to have enough information summarised where the team doesn’t have to spend as long as one would have to in learning something anew. This way one team member’s struggle saves time for the rest of the team, which improves productivity long-term.

Learning and growing in software engineering requires active self-reflection over how we work, what makes us productive, where we want to go and whether we are appreciated in the work we do. In many ways observing how senior engineers think about problems, the context they work within and the solution approach they take can be quite insightful if not inspiring. We improve our skills and ourselves most by looking up to and respecting the work our predecessors have done before us. If we can be half the engineers our mentors and our role models are then there may still be hope for the future.

I wanted to write this as a reminder to me that work isn’t simply about pushing features out the door as soon as possible. It’s about growing yourself, your team and the product.